Addressing the nation that day, Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong said Singapore would be applying a circuit breaker to stem the spread of the coronavirus. The period of enhanced social distancing and isolation was to last for one month from April 7 to May 4, with workplaces and schools closed and most shops shuttered. As the Covid-19 outbreak worsened, the Government extended the circuit breaker till June 1, and further tightened restrictions. And so, life in Singapore came to a sort of standstill, in a bewildering period now known as CB for short. Families were kept apart with people allowed to interact only with those living in the same household. Many grandparents could not see their grandchildren. This threw childcare arrangements into disarray, something that many working parents grudgingly accepted as they had to help their children with home-based learning even as they themselves worked from home. Many turned to baking at home to pass the time, with flour and other baking supplies running out in shops. Outside, the city became a ghost town, with an eerie silence falling across the island. With mostly just essential workers needing to commute, there were fewer cars and buses plying the roads. Electronic Road Pricing was suspended as traffic thinned. MRT trains were almost empty during rush hour. With no dining in allowed at hawker centres, cafes and restaurants, and retail outlets at shopping malls closed, people flocked to outdoor places in search of pleasure and fresh air. They were, after all, limited to going out only for exercise, to see the doctor or to buy essential supplies. As parks, park connectors and beaches filled up, some venues were closed to prevent overcrowding, and people were encouraged to exercise near their homes.The national pastime of shopping, meanwhile, moved online and people bought all manner of goods - from groceries to indoor slides for children. For many retailers, this was an unexpected boon, and they struggled to bring in enough stocks to meet demand, amid supply chain disruptions around the world. Barred from eating out, people bought takeaway or placed delivery orders from their favourite restaurants and hawker stalls. While the circuit breaker proved effective in reducing the spread of Covid-19, it also took a toll on some. Instances of domestic violence and mental health issues rose during the period, a trend seen around the world. The strange period also inspired acts of social responsibility and solidarity, and ordinary Singaporeans came together to help the more vulnerable in their communities, with some buying groceries for their elderly neighbours and others delivering care packages of masks to needy families. The circuit breaker lasted till June 1, with Singapore reopening its economy in phases. While Singapore's circuit breaker was initially seen as a euphemism for a partial lockdown, governments and scientists around the world have since used the term to describe relatively short and targeted lockdowns with a set date. First, we will close most workplaces, except for essential services and key economic sectors. Food establishments, markets and supermarkets, clinics, hospitals, utilities, transport and key banking services will remain open. They are essential services. We also should not disrupt economic sectors that are strategic, or form part of a global supply chain. People working in these industries can continue to go to work, with safe-distancing measures in place. But most other work premises must close. If the person can work from home, he should do so. But others will not be able to, including foreign workers on construction sites and in shipyards. These workers live in dormitories, and we will make arrangements to look after them. The closure of work places will take effect from next Tuesday. This will ensure that most of our workforce stays at home and limits their physical interaction to as few people as possible. Second, we will also move to full home-based learning in our schools and Institutes of Higher Learning (IHLs). We started with one day of home-based learning this week. This has gone smoothly, with teething issues being resolved. Ministry of Education (MOE) will work with the schools to implement full home-based learning starting next Wednesday. All preschool and student care centres will also be closed, but will provide limited services for children of parents who have to continue working and are unable to make alternative care arrangements. Third, we will tighten restrictions on movements and gatherings of people. It boils down to three things. First, stay at home, as much as possible. Second, avoid socialising with others beyond your own household. Gatherings should be confined to your household. Avoid visiting even your extended families who are not staying with you, especially if they are elderly or vulnerable. Third, go out only to do essential things. For work, if you are in essential services or key economic sectors. To buy food at markets, or to take out from restaurants and hawker centres. Or to exercise in the neighbourhood park, keeping a safe distance from others. Essential services will continue running so that all of us can cope with this new situation, as we batten down to fight this virus. We have enough food supplies to last us through this period and beyond. You can still shop at the supermarket or wet market. And you need not rush to stock up for weeks at a time. You can still buy food from your favourite hawker centres or coffee shop. Though you will have to take out and eat at home with your own family. Rather than hang out and eat outside with your friends. I know these measures will impact our workers and businesses severely. This is already a very difficult time for them. We will help them come through this. On Monday in Parliament, DPM Heng Swee Keat will announce additional support for households and businesses, over and above what was provided in the two earlier Budgets. We will also legislate to require landlords to pass on property tax rebates fully to their tenants. We will also pass new temporary legislation to let businesses and individuals defer certain contractual obligations for a period, such as paying rent, repaying loans, or completing work.
