To address the economic uncertainties brought about by the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak, a total of $5.6 billion has been set aside in Budget 2020 for the Stabilisation and Support Package and Care and Support Package. The $4 billion Stabilisation and Support Package aims to help workers stay employed through wage support and reskilling opportunities. It will also support firms with cash flow and operating costs. More help will be channeled towards five sectors affected by COVID-19 - tourism, aviation, retail, food services and point-to-point transport services. To help households weather through these uncertain times, a special $1.6 billion Care and Support Package will also provide timely help for Singaporeans, with the less well-off receiving more. Additionally, the GST will remain at 7% until after 2021. However, with an ageing population and growing healthcare needs, GST will still need to increase by 2025. A $6 billion Assurance Package will help cushion the impact of the increase on our daily expenses. Many Singaporeans are concerned about how they will pay their bills and household expenses if their livelihoods are affected during this uncertain period. We will put more cash in the hands of all families to help them cope. Here are the 3 ways the Resilience Budget 2020 will help families cope during this uncertain period. Help with daily expenses, enhanced Care and Support, One-off cash payout will be tripled, from the earlier announced $100-$300, to a range from $300 to $900, depending on income. Additional help for Families with young children, Additional cash payout to each parent tripled, from $100 to $300. Enhanced Workfare Special Payment for lower-wage workers, Cash payout of $3,000 this year. Enhanced Grocery Voucher, For needy Singaporeans, they will receive triple of the grocery vouchers given to them, from $100 to $300 for this year. Together with the $100 that will be given next year, needy Singaporeans will get a total of $400 in Grocery Vouchers over 2020 and 2021. PAssion card top up for Singaporeans aged 50 years and above, The earlier-announced one-off PAssion card top-up will be in cash instead, so as to avoid the need to queue at top-up stations during this period. Strengthening our network of support. Double grants to Self-Help Groups to $20 million over two years. Increase additional grant to Community Development Councils (CDCs), from $2 million to $75 million. $25 million NTUC Care Fund (COVID-19), Up to $300 of one-off relief to low- to middle- income eligible union members. $4 million top-up to the Self-Employed Person Training Support Scheme, Union members to get an additional training allowance of up to $1 per hour. This will be on top of enhanced training allowance rates of $10 per hour. Greater flexibility on fees and loans, Government fees and charges. One-year freeze on all government fees and charges, from 1 April 2020 to 31 March 2021. This will apply to all fees for government services. Student Loan Relief, One-year suspension of loan repayment and interest charges, from 1 June 2020 to 31 May 2021. This applies to all graduates who have taken a government loan for their university and polytechnic studies. HDB Mortgage Arrears Relief, Three-month suspension of late payment charges on HDB mortgage arrears. HDB will continue to exercise flexibility when providing assistance during this period, through existing measures such as deferring payment of loan instalments for six months. Every adult Singaporean will receive an additional $300 cash payout. This is on top of the $300 to $900 cash payment of the Care and Support package announced in the Resilience Budget.The payment of the first tranche of the Care and support Package will also be brought forward to April 2020. On 26 May 2020, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance Heng Swee Keat announced the “Fortitude” Budget. This $33 billion Supplementary Budget will provide support for businesses and workers to adapt, transform and seize new opportunities. It also gives additional support for households and the community to cope with the disruptions and seize new opportunities in adversity. In addition, the Fortitude budget provides funding to frontline agencies, to boost the clinical management of cases and swabbing and testing capabilities. The Fortitude budget is this year’s fourth budget. It follows the previously announced Unity Budget, Resilience Budget and Solidarity Budget. It is a test of the strength and fortitude of our people, a test of our resilience and unity.  How we respond will define us as a people. Here’s a snapshot of what was announced in the Fortitude Budget. For workers, The Job Support Scheme (JSS) will be enhanced in three ways. JSS will be extended for 1 more month to cover wages in August 2020. For firms that cannot resume operations immediately after the circuit breaker, the Government will continue to provide wage support at 75% until August 2020, or when they are allowed to re-open (whichever is earlier). Increased support for some affected sectors (eg. aerospace sector, retail, marine and offshore) - an increase from the previous 25% to either 50% or 75%. Some of our workers may lose their jobs. Some of these jobs will not come back.  Other jobs may look different going into the future. An SGUnited Jobs & Skills Package will create close to 100,000 opportunities in three areas – jobs, traineeships and skills training. Aim to create 40,000 jobs by end-2020. 15,000 jobs in the public sector; 11,000 jobs in the private sector. The remaining 14,000 places will come from the expanded career conversion programmes, such as the Place-and-Train conversion programmes under the Adapt and Grow Initiative, and Company-Led Training programmes under the TechSkills Accelerator or TeSA initiative. The SGUnited Traineeships programme will provide 21,000 traineeships for local first-time job seekers. Applications open from 1 June. A new SGUnited Mid-Career Traineeships scheme will be created to provide 4,000 traineeships for mid-career job seekers. SGUnited Skills Training courses will be available for about 30,000 jobseekers to upgrade their skills while looking for a job. A training allowance of $1,200 per month for a course duration (between 6 to 12 months) will cover basic expenses. This will be rolled out progressively from July. There will be hiring incentive for employers which hire local workers who have completed eligible traineeship and training programmes. This will be expanded to cover workers of all ages. For eligible workers under the age of 40, the incentive will be 20% of the monthly salary for 6 months, capped at $6,000 in total. For those 40 and above, the incentive will be 40% of the monthly salary for 6 months, capped at $12,000 in total. An additional $800m will be set aside for the COVID-19 support grant to support Singaporeans and PRs who need help. This includes those who have lost their jobs, are placed on no-pay leave or face significantly reduced salaries. Eligible recipients will receive up to $800 per month for 3 months. For businesses, Supporting enterprises with cashflow, costs and credit. Foreign Worker Levy and Waiver Rebate will be extended by up to 2 months for businesses that are not allowed to resume on-site operations after the circuit breaker. There will be a 100% waiver and $750 rebate in June 2020, and a 50% waiver and $375 rebate in July 2020. Higher CPF contribution rates will be deferred. The increase in CPF contribution rates for senior workers will be deferred by 1 year, from 1 Jan 2021 to 1 Jan 2022. Cash grants to help SMEs with rental. $2 billion in cash grants will help SME tenants with rental costs. Including the property tax rebate for 2020, the Government will: Offset another 2 months’ rental for qualifying SME tenants of commercial properties; Offset 1 months’ rental for qualifying SME tenants of industrial and office properties. There will also be additional rental waivers for commercial and other non-residential tenants of Government properties – including stall holders of hawker centres and markets, tenants of commercial buildings and industrial, office and agricultural tenants. Financial support for promising startups, This includes $4.5b of loans through Government financial schemes like the Temporary Bridging Loan programme and the Enterprise Financing Scheme, and $285m additional financing support for promising startups by co-investing with the private sector. To ensure good job opportunities remain available for Singaporeans, we must work to build strong and viable businesses for the future. There will also be support for businesses to go digital. Encouraging e-payments, A bonus of $300 per month over 5 months will encourage the adoption of e-payments by stallholders in hawker centres, wet markets, coffee shops and industrial canteens. Digital resilience bonus, Starting with food services and retail sectors, a payout of up to $5,000 will help businesses digitalise, with PayNow Corporate, e-invoicing, business process or e-commerce solutions. There will be an additional payout of $5,000 for businesses that use advanced solutions. Our promise to workers is this. As long as you are willing to pick up new skills and adapt, to access available opportunities to work or learn, the Government will provide our strongest support to help you. For the community, There will be more help with household expenses. Solidarity Utilities Credit, A one-off $100 Solidarity Utilities Credit for each household with at least one Singapore Citizen will be credited in households’ July or August 2020 utilities bills with SP Group. This will cover all property types. Fostering digital inclusion, There will be an accelerated timeline for all secondary school students to own a digital learning device. For seniors, a Seniors Go Digital movement to build digital literacy through one-to-one coaching and small-group learning. There will be financial support for lower-income seniors to own digital devices. Support for charities and social services agencies, An Enhanced Fund-Raising Programme will provide dollar-for-dollar matching on eligible donations raised between 1 April 2020 to 31 March 2021, capped at $250,000 matching per charity. The Invictus Fund will provide an $18m top-up to help social service agencies maintain services, retain staff and adopt technology. Support for charities, Top-up to help social services agencies.
