Home, family, friends. I have a weekly get-together (e.g. high tea, mahjong, movie screening) with my close group of friends. Can we do this? Social gatherings of up to any eight persons can take place, in premises that are open to the public. The eight persons do not need to be from the same household. If gathering at home, households may receive up to eight visitors per day. These eight visitors are not restricted to having to come from the same household. Nevertheless, individuals are advised to keep their daily number of contacts small and preferably limited to a regular circle of close contacts. If accepting visitors, keep them preferably to family members or very close friends, and remind them not to visit if they are not feeling well. My household consists of more than eight people. Can we all go out together, since we are from the same household? The group size limit of eight is meant to minimise interaction and the risk of transmission across different households, but we seek your understanding that it is not possible to easily tell in a public setting if a group of more than eight is from the same household or from more than one household. So you may choose to go out together, but we request that your household observes the prevailing group size limits in public settings and venues, so as not to inadvertently encourage others, who may come from different households, to gather into groups that are larger than eight too. Please help us to uphold a public discipline that keeps Singapore safe. No. In line with the prevailing group size limits, all diners (even from the same household) should be in groups of no more than eight, with at least one metre separation between groups. Since my household of more than eight people can all go out together, can we all sit together at the same table in a restaurant? My parents usually come over to help me with caring for my children on weekdays. Can they do so? Yes they can, and they will be part of the cap of eight visitors to a household per day. Families who are relying on the grandparents for childcare on a daily basis are advised to take the necessary safe distancing precautions to protect the grandparents. Observe personal hygiene and try to reduce interaction time as far as possible when visiting their home. Do not visit if you are unwell.  I am divorced and my children take turns to live with me and my ex-spouse. Can this arrangement continue? I am separated/divorced and my spouse/ex-spouse has care and control of my child(ren). I see my child(ren) as per access arrangements. Can these access arrangements continue? Yes, these access arrangements can continue as per normal. Can I allow people offering home-based services into my home? For example: repairman to fix water pipes/electricity/cable/air-conditioning issues, part-time cleaner / gardener / tuition teacher day-time nanny caring for my child? Can they visit more than 2 households per day? Yes, these are home-based services that are allowed. They will count as part of the eight persons cap on visitors per day. Service providers are required to wear masks and maintain a one metre distancing. Limiting visits to two other households per day applies to social visits, and does not apply to those who need to visit multiple households in the course of business or employment. Can I receive visitors to my home if I provide home-based services, e.g. private dining, hairdressing services, tuition classes? Yes, these home-based services are allowed. Like any other homes, these homes offering services may receive up to eight visitors per day. Service providers and visitors should wear masks and maintain a one metre distancing. Can I organise an outdoor taichi / yoga session with my friends in the park for more than eight persons, as long as we keep in groups of eight, with one-metre safe distancing between groups? The safe distancing measures are put in place to minimise interactions to prevent transmission. In line with the spirit of the intent, social gatherings of more than eight persons should not take place. Outdoor exercise classes organised by a registered instructor can take place with up to 50 persons in groups of no more than eight persons. What if I go to the supermarket/convenience /F&B shop and there are too many people inside or in the queue for me to practise one-metre safe distancing? Please follow the instructions of the supermarket/shop staff on where and how to queue. Alternatively, you may wish to go to an alternate supermarket/shop if possible, or come back again later at a less busy time. What if someone outside my group comes close to me, less than one metre distance, in public spaces? Will I be punished? Members of public are required to keep a distance of at least one metre from other individuals or groups (of up to eight persons) in public places (excluding in vehicles or public transport facilities). Enforcement officers will assess the facts of each case carefully, including whether there are reasonable explanations for any compliance. We will not hesitate to take action against egregious breaches. How will the Government check and enforce these measures? What are the penalties for individuals who flout the rules? Who can serve these enforcement penalties? These measures have been provided with the force of law under the COVID-19 (Temporary Measures) Act, and are enforceable across sectors and against individuals and businesses. This will be enforced strictly, for the protection of everyone. Enforcement officers will be on the ground, and egregious breaking of these rules will lead to enforcement action under the Infectious Disease Act or the COVID-19 (Temporary Measures) Act. The penalties for breaches are imprisonment for up to a term not exceeding 6 months or a fine not exceeding $10,000 or both, and (for a second offence under COVID-19 (Temporary Measures) Act) up to a term not exceeding 12 months or a fine not exceeding $20,000 or both. There have been cases where frauds were acting as Safe Distancing Ambassadors. How do I verify if the enforcement officer is indeed appointed by the Government? Will I be expected to make payment for any penalties upfront? Safe-Distancing Ambassadors are deployed by various government agencies to help and guide businesses and individuals to comply with the safe distancing measures. They do not impose fines. Enforcement Officers will not collect fines on the spot, from individuals and businesses who have contravened these rules. The penalties for breaches will be issued to individuals or businesses in the form of composition letters which will state the relevant follow up actions required. The spirit of these measures is to get all of us to minimise physical contact. If we do not go out, if we avoid contact with others, then the virus will not be able to spread. It is as simple as that. I know this is very hard to do. Very hard to do as a practical matter, in places like hawker centres and wet markets, it is difficult to practise safe-distancing, especially on the weekends when it is crowded. It will help if we all adjust our habits. For example, do our marketing on weekdays instead of weekends to avoid the crowd. We will also deploy more Safe-Distancing Ambassadors to encourage people not to crowd together, so please cooperate with them. Safe distancing is also hard for a psychological and emotional reason: it goes very much against our human instincts. It is in our nature to want to socialise, to be close to those we are talking to, to take comfort in the warmth and company of friends and family. I fully understand this. But I hope you will also understand why we all have to take social distancing extremely seriously in this period. This is the only effective way to slow the transmission of the virus, so that we gradually bring our numbers down. It is also the best way to keep our families safe, and particularly to protect our seniors from getting ill. So please bear with the painful adjustments that we have make. Each and every one of us can, and must do our part, to keep everyone in Singapore safe from COVID-19.
